    can write very like my lady, your niece; on forgotten matter we
    can hardly make distinction of our hands.
  SIR TOBY. Excellent! I smell a device.
  AGUECHEEK. I have't in my nose too.
  SIR TOBY. He shall think, by the letters that thou wilt drop, that
    they come from my niece, and that she's in love with him.
  MARIA. My purpose is, indeed, a horse of that colour.
  AGUECHEEK. And your horse now would make him an ass.
  MARIA. Ass, I doubt not.
  AGUECHEEK. O, 'twill be admirable!
  MARIA. Sport royal, I warrant you. I know my physic will work with
    him. I will plant you two, and let the fool make a third, where
    he shall find the letter; observe his construction of it. For
    this night, to bed, and dream on the event. Farewell.
 Exit
  SIR TOBY. Good night, Penthesilea.
  AGUECHEEK. Before me, she's a good wench.
  SIR TOBY. She's a beagle true-bred, and one that adores me.
    What o' that?
  AGUECHEEK. I was ador'd once too.  
  SIR TOBY. Let's to bed, knight. Thou hadst need send for more
    money.
  AGUECHEEK. If I cannot recover your niece, I am a foul way out.
  SIR TOBY. Send for money, knight; if thou hast her not i' th' end,
    call me Cut.
  AGUECHEEK. If I do not, never trust me; take it how you will.
  SIR TOBY. Come, come, I'll go burn some sack; 'tis too late to go
    to bed now. Come, knight; come, knight.
                                                          Exeunt
SCENE IV.
The DUKE'S palace
Enter DUKE, VIOLA, CURIO, and OTHERS
  DUKE. Give me some music. Now, good morrow, friends.
    Now, good Cesario, but that piece of song,
    That old and antique song we heard last night;
    Methought it did relieve my passion much,
    More than light airs and recollected terms
    Of these most brisk and giddy-paced times.
    Come, but one verse.
  CURIO. He is not here, so please your lordship, that should sing
    it.
  DUKE. Who was it?
  CURIO. Feste, the jester, my lord; a fool that the Lady Olivia's
    father took much delight in. He is about the house.
  DUKE. Seek him out, and play the tune the while.
                                       Exit CURIO. [Music plays]
    Come hither, boy. If ever thou shalt love,
    In the sweet pangs of it remember me;
    For such as I am all true lovers are,  
    Unstaid and skittish in all motions else
    Save in the constant image of the creature
    That is belov'd. How dost thou like this tune?
  VIOLA. It gives a very echo to the seat
    Where Love is thron'd.
  DUKE. Thou dost speak masterly.
    My life upon't, young though thou art, thine eye
    Hath stay'd upon some favour that it loves;
    Hath it not, boy?
  VIOLA. A little, by your favour.
  DUKE. What kind of woman is't?
  VIOLA. Of your complexion.
  DUKE. She is not worth thee, then. What years, i' faith?
  VIOLA. About your years, my lord.
  DUKE. Too old, by heaven! Let still the woman take
    An elder than herself; so wears she to him,
    So sways she level in her husband's heart.
    For, boy, however we do praise ourselves,
    Our fancies are more giddy and unfirm,
    More longing, wavering, sooner lost and won,  
    Than women's are.
  VIOLA. I think it well, my lord.
  DUKE. Then let thy love be younger than thyself,
    Or thy affection cannot hold the bent;
    For women are as roses, whose fair flow'r
    Being once display'd doth fall that very hour.
  VIOLA. And so they are; alas, that they are so!
    To die, even when they to perfection grow!
                  Re-enter CURIO and CLOWN
  DUKE. O, fellow, come, the song we had last night.
    Mark it, Cesario; it is old and plain;
    The spinsters and the knitters in the sun,
    And the free maids that weave their thread with bones,
    Do use to chant it; it is silly sooth,
    And dallies with the innocence of love,
    Like the old age.
  CLOWN. Are you ready, sir?
  DUKE. Ay; prithee, sing.                               [Music]  
                     FESTE'S SONG
            Come away, come away, death;
          And in sad cypress let me be laid;
            Fly away, fly away, breath,
          I am slain by a fair cruel maid.
          My shroud of white, stuck all with yew,
                 O, prepare it!
          My part of death no one so true
                 Did share it.
            Not a flower, not a flower sweet,
          On my black coffin let there be strown;
            Not a friend, not a friend greet
          My poor corpse where my bones shall be thrown;
          A thousand thousand to save,
                 Lay me, O, where
          Sad true lover never find my grave,
                 To weep there!  
  DUKE. There's for thy pains.
  CLOWN. No pains, sir; I take pleasure in singing, sir.
  DUKE. I'll pay thy pleasure, then.
  CLOWN. Truly, sir, and pleasure will be paid one time or another.
  DUKE. Give me now leave to leave thee.
  CLOWN. Now the melancholy god protect thee; and the tailor make thy
    doublet of changeable taffeta, for thy mind is a very opal. I
    would have men of such constancy put to sea, that their business
    might be everything, and their intent everywhere: for that's it
    that always makes a good voyage of nothing. Farewell.
                                                      Exit CLOWN
  DUKE. Let all the rest give place.
                                     Exeunt CURIO and ATTENDANTS
    Once more, Cesario,
    Get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty.
    Tell her my love, more noble than the world,
    Prizes not quantity of dirty lands;
    The parts that fortune hath bestow'd upon her,
    Tell her I hold as giddily as Fortune;  
    But 'tis that miracle and queen of gems
    That Nature pranks her in attracts my soul.
  VIOLA. But if she cannot love you, sir?
  DUKE. I cannot be so answer'd.
  VIOLA. Sooth, but you must.
    Say that some lady, as perhaps there is,
    Hath for your love as great a pang of heart
    As you have for Olivia. You cannot love her;
    You tell her so. Must she not then be answer'd?
  DUKE. There is no woman's sides
    Can bide the beating of so strong a passion
    As love doth give my heart; no woman's heart
    So big to hold so much; they lack retention.
    Alas, their love may be call'd appetite-
    No motion of the liver, but the palate-
    That suffer surfeit, cloyment, and revolt;
    But mine is all as hungry as the sea,
    And can digest as much. Make no compare
    Between that love a woman can bear me
    And that I owe Olivia.  
  VIOLA. Ay, but I know-
  DUKE. What dost thou know?
  VIOLA. Too well what love women to men may owe.
    In faith, they are as true of heart as we.
    My father had a daughter lov'd a man,
    As it might be perhaps, were I a woman,
    I should your lordship.
  DUKE. And what's her history?
  VIOLA. A blank, my lord. She never told her love,
    But let concealment, like a worm i' th' bud,
    Feed on her damask cheek. She pin'd in thought;
    And with a green and yellow melancholy
    She sat like Patience on a monument,
    Smiling at grief. Was not this love indeed?
    We men may say more, swear more, but indeed
    Our shows are more than will; for still we prove
    Much in our vows, but little in our love.
  DUKE. But died thy sister of her love, my boy?
  VIOLA. I am all the daughters of my father's house,
    And all the brothers too- and yet I know not.  
    Sir, shall I to this lady?
  DUKE. Ay, that's the theme.
    To her in haste. Give her this jewel; say
    My love can give no place, bide no denay.             Exeunt
SCENE V.
OLIVIA'S garden
Enter SIR TOBY, SIR ANDREW, and FABIAN
  SIR TOBY. Come thy ways, Signior Fabian.
  FABIAN. Nay, I'll come; if I lose a scruple of this sport let me be
    boil'd to death with melancholy.
  SIR TOBY. Wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly rascally
    sheep-biter come by some notable shame?
  FABIAN. I would exult, man; you know he brought me out o' favour
    with my lady about a bear-baiting here.
  SIR TOBY. To anger him we'll have the bear again; and we will fool
    him black and blue- shall we not, Sir Andrew?
  AGUECHEEK. And we do not, it is pity of our lives.
                       Enter MARIA
  SIR TOBY. Here comes the little villain.
    How now, my metal of India!
  MARIA. Get ye all three into the box-tree. Malvolio's coming down
    this walk. He has been yonder i' the sun practising behaviour to  
    his own shadow this half hour. Observe him, for the love of
    mockery, for I know this letter will make a contemplative idiot
    of him. Close, in the name of jesting! [As the men hide she drops
    a letter] Lie thou there; for here comes the trout that must be
    caught with tickling.
 Exit
                      Enter MALVOLIO
  MALVOLIO. 'Tis but fortune; all is fortune. Maria once told me she
    did affect me; and I have heard herself come thus near, that,
    should she fancy, it should be one of my complexion. Besides, she
    uses me with a more exalted respect than any one else that
    follows her. What should I think on't?
  SIR TOBY. Here's an overweening rogue!
  FABIAN. O, peace! Contemplation makes a rare turkey-cock of him;
    how he jets under his advanc'd plumes!
  AGUECHEEK. 'Slight, I could so beat the rogue-
  SIR TOBY. Peace, I say.
  MALVOLIO. To be Count Malvolio!  
  SIR TOBY. Ah, rogue!
  AGUECHEEK. Pistol him, pistol him.
  SIR TOBY. Peace, peace!
  MALVOLIO. There is example for't: the Lady of the Strachy married
    the yeoman of the wardrobe.
  AGUECHEEK. Fie on him, Jezebel!
  FABIAN. O, peace! Now he's deeply in; look how imagination blows
    him.
  MALVOLIO. Having been three months married to her, sitting in my
    state-
  SIR TOBY. O, for a stone-bow to hit him in the eye!
  MALVOLIO. Calling my officers about me, in my branch'd velvet gown,
    having come from a day-bed- where I have left Olivia sleeping-
  SIR TOBY. Fire and brimstone!
  FABIAN. O, peace, peace!
  MALVOLIO. And then to have the humour of state; and after a demure
    travel of regard, telling them I know my place as I would they
    should do theirs, to ask for my kinsman Toby-
  SIR TOBY. Bolts and shackles!
  FABIAN. O, peace, peace, peace! Now, now.  
  MALVOLIO. Seven of my people, with an obedient start, make out for
    him. I frown the while, and perchance wind up my watch, or play
    with my- some rich jewel. Toby approaches; curtsies there to me-
  SIR TOBY. Shall this fellow live?
  FABIAN. Though our silence be drawn from us with cars, yet peace.
  MALVOLIO. I extend my hand to him thus, quenching my familiar smile
   with an austere regard of control-
  SIR TOBY. And does not Toby take you a blow o' the lips then?
  MALVOLIO. Saying 'Cousin Toby, my fortunes having cast me on your
    niece give me this prerogative of speech'-
  SIR TOBY. What, what?
  MALVOLIO. 'You must amend your drunkenness'-
  SIR TOBY. Out, scab!
  FABIAN. Nay, patience, or we break the sinews of our plot.
  MALVOLIO. 'Besides, you waste the treasure of your time with a
    foolish knight'-
  AGUECHEEK. That's me, I warrant you.
  MALVOLIO. 'One Sir Andrew.'
  AGUECHEEK. I knew 'twas I; for many do call me fool.
  MALVOLIO. What employment have we here?  
                                          [Taking up the letter]
  FABIAN. Now is the woodcock near the gin.
  SIR TOBY. O, peace! And the spirit of humours intimate reading
    aloud to him!
  MALVOLIO. By my life, this is my lady's hand: these be her very
    C's, her U's, and her T's; and thus makes she her great P's. It
    is, in contempt of question, her hand.
  AGUECHEEK. Her C's, her U's, and her T's. Why that?
  MALVOLIO. [Reads] 'To the unknown belov'd, this, and my good
    wishes.' Her very phrases! By your leave, wax. Soft! And the
    impressure her Lucrece with which she uses to seal; 'tis my lady.
    To whom should this be?
  FABIAN. This wins him, liver and all.
  MALVOLIO. [Reads]
                    Jove knows I love,
                      But who?
                    Lips, do not move;
                    No man must know.'
    'No man must know.' What follows? The numbers alter'd!
    'No man must know.' If this should be thee, Malvolio?
  SIR TOBY. Marry, hang thee, brock!
  MALVOLIO. [Reads]
             'I may command where I adore;
               But silence, like a Lucrece knife,
             With bloodless stroke my heart doth gore;
               M. O. A. I. doth sway my life.'
  FABIAN. A fustian riddle!
  SIR TOBY. Excellent wench, say I.
  MALVOLIO. 'M. O. A. I. doth sway my life.'
    Nay, but first let me see, let me see, let me see.
  FABIAN. What dish o' poison has she dress'd him!
  SIR TOBY. And with what wing the staniel checks at it!
  MALVOLIO. 'I may command where I adore.' Why, she may command me: I
    serve her; she is my lady. Why, this is evident to any formal
    capacity; there is no obstruction in this. And the end- what
    should that alphabetical position portend? If I could make that  
    resemble something in me. Softly! M. O. A. I.-
  SIR TOBY. O, ay, make up that! He is now at a cold scent.
  FABIAN. Sowter will cry upon't for all this, though it be as rank
    as a fox.
  MALVOLIO. M- Malvolio; M- why, that begins my name.
  FABIAN. Did not I say he would work it out?
    The cur is excellent at faults.
  MALVOLIO. M- But then there is no consonancy in the sequel; that
    suffers under probation: A should follow, but O does.
  FABIAN. And O shall end, I hope.
  SIR TOBY. Ay, or I'll cudgel him, and make him cry 'O!'
  MALVOLIO. And then I comes behind.
  FABIAN. Ay, an you had any eye behind you, you might see more
    detraction at your heels than fortunes before you.
  MALVOLIO. M. O. A. I. This simulation is not as the former; and
    yet, to crush this a little, it would bow to me, for every one of
    these letters are in my name. Soft! here follows prose.
                                                         [Reads]
      'If this fall into thy hand, revolve. In my stars I am above
    thee; but be not afraid of greatness. Some are born great, some  
    achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon 'em. Thy
    Fates open their hands; let thy blood and spirit embrace them;
    and, to inure thyself to what thou art like to be, cast thy
    humble slough and appear fresh. Be opposite with a kinsman, surly
    with servants; let thy tongue tang arguments of state; put
    thyself into the trick of singularity. She thus advises thee that
    sighs for thee. Remember who commended thy yellow stockings, and
    wish'd to see thee ever cross-garter'd. I say, remember, Go to,
    thou art made, if thou desir'st to be so; if not, let me see thee
    a steward still, the fellow of servants, and not worthy to touch
    Fortune's fingers. Farewell. She that would alter services with
    thee,
                                         THE FORTUNATE-UNHAPPY.'
    Daylight and champain discovers not more. This is open. I will be
    proud, I will read politic authors, I will baffle Sir Toby, I
    will wash off gross acquaintance, I will be point-devise the very
    man. I do not now fool myself to let imagination jade me; for
    every reason excites to this, that my lady loves me. She did
    commend my yellow stockings of late, she did praise my leg being  
    cross-garter'd; and in this she manifests herself to my love, and
    with a kind of injunction drives me to these habits of her
    liking. I thank my stars I am happy. I will be strange, stout, in
    yellow stockings, and cross-garter'd, even with the swiftness of
    putting on. Jove and my stars be praised! Here is yet a
    postscript.
    [Reads] 'Thou canst not choose but know who I am. If thou
    entertain'st my love, let it appear in thy smiling; thy smiles
    become thee well. Therefore in my presence still smile, dear my
    sweet, I prithee.'
    Jove, I thank thee. I will smile; I will do everything that thou
    wilt have me.                                           Exit
  FABIAN. I will not give my part of this sport for a pension of
    thousands to be paid from the Sophy.
  SIR TOBY. I could marry this wench for this device.
  AGUECHEEK. So could I too.
  SIR TOBY. And ask no other dowry with her but such another jest.
                          Enter MARIA
  AGUECHEEK. Nor I neither.
  FABIAN. Here comes my noble gull-catcher.
  SIR TOBY. Wilt thou set thy foot o' my neck?
  AGUECHEEK. Or o' mine either?
  SIR TOBY. Shall I play my freedom at tray-trip, and become thy
    bond-slave?
  AGUECHEEK. I' faith, or I either?
  SIR TOBY. Why, thou hast put him in such a dream that when the
    image of it leaves him he must run mad.
  MARIA. Nay, but say true; does it work upon him?
  SIR TOBY. Like aqua-vita! with a midwife.
  AIARIA. If you will then see the fruits of the sport, mark his
    first approach before my lady. He will come to her in yellow
    stockings, and 'tis a colour she abhors, and cross-garter'd, a
    fashion she detests; and he will smile upon her, which will now
    be so unsuitable to her disposition, being addicted to a
    melancholy as she is, that it cannot but turn him into a notable
    contempt. If you will see it, follow me.  
  SIR TOBY. To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit!
  AGUECHEEK. I'll make one too.                           Exeunt
<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>
ACT III. SCENE I.
OLIVIA'S garden
Enter VIOLA, and CLOWN with a tabor
  VIOLA. Save thee, friend, and thy music!
    Dost thou live by thy tabor?
  CLOWN. No, sir, I live by the church.
  VIOLA. Art thou a churchman?
  CLOWN. No such matter, sir: I do live by the church; for I do live
    at my house, and my house doth stand by the church.
  VIOLA. So thou mayst say the king lies by a beggar, if a beggar
    dwell near him; or the church stands by thy tabor, if thy tabor
    stand by the church.
  CLOWN. You have said, sir. To see this age! A sentence is but a
    chev'ril glove to a good wit. How quickly the wrong side may be
    turn'd outward!
  VIOLA. Nay, that's certain; they that dally nicely with words may
    quickly make them wanton.
  CLOWN. I would, therefore, my sister had had name, sir.
  VIOLA. Why, man?
  CLOWN. Why, sir, her name's a word; and to dally with that word  
    might make my sister wanton. But indeed words are very rascals
    since bonds disgrac'd them.
  VIOLA. Thy reason, man?
  CLOWN. Troth, sir, I can yield you none without words, and words
    are grown so false I am loath to prove reason with them.
  VIOLA. I warrant thou art a merry fellow and car'st for nothing.
  CLOWN. Not so, sir; I do care for something; but in my conscience,
    sir, I do not care for you. If that be to care for nothing, sir,
    I would it would make you invisible.
  VIOLA. Art not thou the Lady Olivia's fool?
  CLOWN. No, indeed, sir; the Lady Olivia has no folly; she will keep
    no fool, sir, till she be married; and fools are as like husbands
    as pilchers are to herrings- the husband's the bigger. I am
    indeed not her fool, but her corrupter of words.
  VIOLA. I saw thee late at the Count Orsino's.
  CLOWN. Foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the sun- it
    shines everywhere. I would be sorry, sir, but the fool should be
    as oft with your master as with my mistress: think I saw your
    wisdom there.
  VIOLA. Nay, an thou pass upon me, I'll no more with thee.  
    Hold, there's expenses for thee.             [Giving a coin]
  CLOWN. Now Jove, in his next commodity of hair, send the a beard!
  VIOLA. By my troth, I'll tell thee, I am almost sick for one;
    [Aside] though I would not have it grow on my chin.- Is thy lady
    within?
  CLOWN. Would not a pair of these have bred, sir?
  VIOLA. Yes, being kept together and put to use.
  CLOWN. I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia, sir, to bring a
    Cressida to this Troilus.
  VIOLA. I understand you, sir; 'tis well begg'd.
                                           [Giving another coin]
  CLOWN. The matter, I hope, is not great, sir, begging but a beggar:
    Cressida was a beggar. My lady is within, sir. I will construe to
    them whence you come; who you are and what you would are out of
    my welkin- I might say 'element' but the word is overworn.
                                                      Exit CLOWN
  VIOLA. This fellow is wise enough to play the fool;
    And to do that well craves a kind of wit.
    He must observe their mood on whom he jests,
    The quality of persons, and the time;  
    And, like the haggard, check at every feather
    That comes before his eye. This is a practice
    As full of labour as a wise man's art;
    For folly that he wisely shows is fit;
    But wise men, folly-fall'n, quite taint their wit.
                Enter SIR TOBY and SIR ANDREW
  SIR TOBY. Save you, gentleman!
  VIOLA. And you, sir.
  AGUECHEEK. Dieu vous garde, monsieur.
  VIOLA. Et vous aussi; votre serviteur.
  AGUECHEEK. I hope, sir, you are; and I am yours.
  SIR TOBY. Will you encounter the house? My niece is desirous you
    should enter, if your trade be to her.
  VIOLA. I am bound to your niece, sir; I mean, she is the list of my
    voyage.
  SIR TOBY. Taste your legs, sir; put them to motion.
  VIOLA. My legs do better understand me, sir, than I understand what
    you mean by bidding me taste my legs.  
  SIR TOBY. I mean, to go, sir, to enter.
  VIOLA. I will answer you with gait and entrance. But we are
    prevented.
                  Enter OLIVIA and MARIA
    Most excellent accomplish'd lady, the heavens rain odours on you!
  AGUECHEEK. That youth's a rare courtier- 'Rain odours' well!
  VIOLA. My matter hath no voice, lady, but to your own most pregnant
    and vouchsafed car.
  AGUECHEEK. 'Odours,' 'pregnant,' and 'vouchsafed'- I'll get 'em all
    three all ready.
  OLIVIA. Let the garden door be shut, and leave me to my hearing.
    [Exeunt all but OLIVIA and VIOLA] Give me your hand, sir.
  VIOLA. My duty, madam, and most humble service.
  OLIVIA. What is your name?
  VIOLA. Cesario is your servant's name, fair Princess.
  OLIVIA. My servant, sir! 'Twas never merry world
    Since lowly feigning was call'd compliment.
    Y'are servant to the Count Orsino, youth.  
  VIOLA. And he is yours, and his must needs be yours:
    Your servant's servant is your servant, madam.
  OLIVIA. For him, I think not on him; for his thoughts,
    Would they were blanks rather than fill'd with me!
  VIOLA. Madam, I come to whet your gentle thoughts
    On his behalf.
  OLIVIA. O, by your leave, I pray you:
    I bade you never speak again of him;
    But, would you undertake another suit,
    I had rather hear you to solicit that
    Than music from the spheres.
  VIOLA. Dear lady-
  OLIVIA. Give me leave, beseech you. I did send,
    After the last enchantment you did here,
    A ring in chase of you; so did I abuse
    Myself, my servant, and, I fear me, you.
    Under your hard construction must I sit,
    To force that on you in a shameful cunning
    Which you knew none of yours. What might you think?
    Have you not set mine honour at the stake,  
    And baited it with all th' unmuzzled thoughts
    That tyrannous heart can think? To one of your receiving
    Enough is shown: a cypress, not a bosom,
    Hides my heart. So, let me hear you speak.
  VIOLA. I Pity YOU.
  OLIVIA. That's a degree to love.
  VIOLA. No, not a grize; for 'tis a vulgar proof
    That very oft we pity enemies.
  OLIVIA. Why, then, methinks 'tis time to smile again.
    O world, how apt the poor are to be proud!
    If one should be a prey, how much the better
    To fall before the lion than the wolf!       [Clock strikes]
    The clock upbraids me with the waste of time.
    Be not afraid, good youth; I will not have you;
    And yet, when wit and youth is come to harvest,
    Your wife is like to reap a proper man.
    There lies your way, due west.
  VIOLA. Then westward-ho!
    Grace and good disposition attend your ladyship!
    You'll nothing, madam, to my lord by me?  
